Diner is wearing weightlifting shoes
which is a heel elevated shoe I'm
wearing a flat sold shoe so the question
was when do we know we're going to be
using heels well there's two main
reasons why we'd use heels one is to
assist us with achieving greater depth
and maintaining a great position from
start to finish so what's a great
position mean with depth in powerlifting
competition that's the only competition
that judges us on depth officially so in
if you don't compete you're not being
judged on depth we go as deep as our
ility allows so that's that's the
terminology that I'll be using in
powerlifting the crease of the hip needs
to go below the top of the knee okay so
that's the crease of the the hip it's
below the top of the knee that's got to
be higher so if we come a bit higher
that's parallel also known as high so
people say parting depth is parallel
it's not it's below parallel but if
you're not a powerlifter um you don't
need any of that there are such thing as
partial range squads which I'm not a
huge fan of and typically what I want to
be working people towards is is roughly
powerlifting depth even if you're not a
competitor however if you got some type
of condition where your joints don't
allow you to achieve that depth I won't
force you to go as to grass for example
if you lack the mobility to achieve that
depth depending on the squat pattern
that's when I might suggest something
like a squat shoe so so Den is using
them just to to keep it simple today
we're just going to have one pair of
Footwear but a lot of the variations
that we do like will be flat sold shoe
or even bare feet so bare feet is
equivalent to a flat sold shoe now the
elevated heel makes up for a lack of
ankle joint dorsy flexion so planter
flexion is pointing downwards dorsy
flexion is upwards so if you lack ankle
joint dorsy flexion it may interfere
with achieving a great depth in
squatting so therefore adding heel
elevation can assist you in achieving a
better depth what do we need more depth
for okay well let's talk a little bit
about the science science is now coming
out with a whole bunch of new research
that supports training the muscle at the
longest position has most benefit for
muscle building okay so that means we've
got this range of motion okay that's
where the muscles are at the shortest
position and then this range of motion
where the muscles at the fully
lengthened position so if you were to
compare three ranges of motion which is
what a lot of the research compares the
third range is full range so you've got
lengthen partials which is lengthen
partials versus shortened partials
versus full range contrary to the way
that I like to do it which is full range
lengthen partials produce the most
hypertrophy so if your goal is purely
muscle building that's going to be more
beneficial which is where an elevated
heel can allow you to achieve greater
depth and train your muscles through a
more lengthened position now in a
powerlifting competition you don't need
to worry about muscle hypertrophy or
lengthened anything all you need to
worry about is objectively achieving
that specific depth where the crease of
your hip goes below the top of your knee
and a lot of great powerlifters are able
to achieve that without the assistance
of elevated heels and and sometimes the
elevated heels can make it a little bit
weaker like that's how it does for me
for me I squat in competition with flat
sted shoe because I'm stronger that way
it allows me to sit my hips back and use
my stronger hips elevating the heels
will allow you to push the knees further
forward and remain more upright if you
lack the mobility that's just what you
have to do to allow more depth now
there's another reason why we might
Elevate the heels if you want to build
muscle specifically there's a squat
variation that we would prefer that's
going to allow us to bend our knees more
and bend our hips less see what we've
got is we've got the two main joints
that are acting on a squat which is the
hip joints and the knee joints so
there's a hip dominant Squat and an e
dominant squat a hip dominant squat is
where the hips shoot back
further that uses a stronger structure
which is our hip extensors then we've
got another squat pattern where our
knees push forward further which uses a
different structure which is the knee
extensors or in other words the muscles
responsible for knee extension is what
quadriceps so if you want to build
quadriceps this is kind of like the
optimal position to be in my heels are
elevated uh they're coming off the
ground I kind of don't want that it's a
bit weaker okay but this is where a heel
elevation built in the shoe can help
achieve this position that I'm doing
here which is less hip Bend and more
knee Bend so if I want to maximize
quadriceps involvement I need to
maximize the amount of knee Bend this is
maximal knee Bend how do I know it's
maximal knee Bend
because my hamstrings are squashed up
against my Cal I physically cannot
achieve greater amount of knee bent the
muscle's responsible for extending my
knee joint at what qu quadriceps if your
goal is purely building quads that's
going to be my preference in Footwear
regardless of whether you have the
mobility or not I promise you Den's got
some of the best Mobility I've seen she
doesn't actually need those shoes to
achieve a great depth in squatting but
she uses those shoes to optimize her
depth EX exactly the same as the second
most mobile athletes in the Olympics who
would they be who are the most mobile
athletes in the Olympics gymnasts who
are the second most mobile athletes in
the Olympics Olympic weightlifters so
they are mobile yet they all choose to
wear these shoes so a lot of people say
only wear them if you lack Mobility not
necessarily they do not lack Mobility
why are they using the shoes then
because it optimizes their position in
weightlifting how does it optimize their
position let's talk about the position
in weightlifting so snatch or a cleaning
jerk where you're H having to hold the
heaviest weight possible over the
head what are some of the positional
advantages that they would need to
achieve their positions upright torso
yeah so if you saw what I was doing here
with my heels elevated upright torso as
opposed to heels flat on the ground I do
not want to hold and I wouldn't be able
to hold a really really heavy weight
over my head with my torso tipped that
far forward it's inefficient and it's
going to beat my my shoulders up over
time